Detailed Outline of ESE Undergraduate Courses 
FIRST YEAR FIRST TERM 
Ch 1113 
Credit: 3.0  
Chemistry I  
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Chemical Equilibrium: Law of mass action, equilibrium constant, magnitude of equilibrium constant and the 
direction of reaction, factors affecting equilibrium constant, Le Chatelier’s principle. Numerical values of equilibrium 
constant. 
Electro-Chemistry: Electrolytes; Nernst theory of electrode potential, type of electrodes and electrode potentials, 
EMF measurement, polarization and over potentials; Origin of EMF, free energy and EMF, electrical double layer, 
factor affecting electrode reaction and current, Modes of mass transfer, Lithium and lithium ion battery, Transport 
number; pH value and its determination; Electrode potentials, electroplating and galvanizing; Fuel cell, Voltammetry. 
Nuclear Chemistry: Nuclear binding energy, Radioactivity and nuclear reactions, patterns of nuclear stability; 
Nuclear transmutations, nuclear model, energy changes in nuclear reactions; Nuclear fission, nuclear fusion; Nuclear 
reactor, nuclear force, methods of separation of isotopes, applications of isotopes. 
Chemistry of polymer: Basic concepts of polymer and polymerization, co-polymerization, ionic polymerization, 
living polymer and their structures; Concepts of plastics, rubbers and fibers; glass transition temperature, average 
molecular weight and molecular weight distribution; Properties of macromolecules, conducting polymer, optical 
fiber. 
Industrial chemistry: Solid, liquid and gaseous fuels; Coal and its constituents, calorific value of coal and other 
fuels, refining and distillation of crude oil, motor and aviation fuels, thermal and catalytic cracking, petroleum and 
petrochemicals, natural gas and its composition, purification and utilization, LPG gas,.  
Environmental chemistry: Environment and its characteristics, Heavy metal contamination, Chemistry of toxic 
metal and non-metal pollutants, Quality of natural water, classes of polluted water, DO, BOD, COD, hydrocarbons, 
ozone and ozone layer depletion, environmental effects of the oxides of carbon, nitrogen and sulfur.  
Ch 1114    
Credit: 0.75        
Hum 1113   
Credit: 3.0        
Sociology 
Sessional on Ch 1113 
Contact hour: 3/2 hrs/week 
Sociology and Behavioral Science 
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Introduction: Definition, origin and development of Sociology and its perspectives; Impact of Sociology on 
engineering. 
Fundamental concepts: Society, Group, Socialization and Personality development, Family, Marriage, Social 
structure, Social stratifications; Community and Association; Mob property. 
Culture: Culture and civilization, culture and biology, Cultural diffusion, cultural lag, elements of culture.  
Industrialization and Urbanization: Industrial revolution and its impact, Urbanization and its consequences, urban 
ecology, urban social problems; Industrialization in Bangladesh. 
Social and Environmental Issues: Pre-industrial and industrial society; Deviance and social control, Population and 
environment; Social change and its agents; Poverty, Beggary, Crime, Immoral income and Juvenile delinquency. 
Ethics: Meaning of ethics, professional ethics and codes, its positive and negative faces, psychological basis of 
ethics. 
Behavioral Science 
5 | P a g e 
Organizational Behavior and Health: Training and development in organizations; training needs analysis; models 
of training evaluation; Employee relations; psychological contract at work; motivation theories: models and 
applications; job satisfaction and performance; quality of working life; counseling and age at work; impact of 
unemployment. 
Assessing People for Work: Organization design; organization structure and performance; organization development 
and change; psychological basis of resistance to change; culture and climate in organizations; leadership styles and 
models; work groups and team effectiveness at work; team building models and validation evidence; inter-group 
cooperation and conflict in organizations;  business strategy at work; organizations and their environments. 
Math 1113   
Credit: 3.0         
Differential Calculus 
Differential and Integral Calculus 
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Basics: Function and its representations; its domain and range; graph of common function families: power function, 
exponential and logarithmic function, sine and cosine function; Basic concepts of limit, continuity of a function with 
emphasis on piecewise defined functions from geometric and algebraic point of view; Derivative of function from 
geometric, algebraic and physical point of view, Review of differentiation techniques: power function, exponential 
and logarithmic functions, trigonometric and inverse trigonometric functions, differentiation of products and 
quotients and chain rule of differentiation; Differential calculus of hyperbolic and inverse hyperbolic functions. 
Application and Existence theorems: Implicit differentiation; Related Rates problems; Differentials, linear 
approximation (tangent line approximation), and error propagation; Maxima, minima, and optimization problems; 
Rolle’s Theorem, Mean Value Theorem, Corollaries of Mean Value Theorem, Taylor’s Theorem, approximation of 
functions using Taylor’s polynomials, and Maclaurin Series.   
Partial Differentiation and Curvature: Functions of two or more variables, level curves, and contour plots; Partial 
differentiation and its geometrical, analytic, and physical interpretation; Chain rule of partial differentiation, equation 
of tangent plane, and total differential; Curvature, radius of curvature, and center of curvature. 
Integral Calculus 
Basics: Review of indefinite integration rules for power, exponential, logarithmic, trigonometric, inverse 
trigonometric, hyperbolic and inverse hyperbolic functions; Definite integrals, its properties; Riemann Sum and its 
interpretation in definite integrals; Fundamental theorems of calculus; Mean value theorem for integrals and average 
value of a continues function. 
Techniques of Integration: Integration by substitution; Integration by parts; Integration of rational function by 
partial fractions; Integration by trigonometric substitutions; Integration by successive reduction; Differentiation under 
the sign of integration, Integration under the sign of integration; Gamma and beta functions. 
Application of Integration: Area between two curves; Volume by Slicing (disks and washer technique), volume by 
revolution about 𝑥 and 𝑦 asis, volume by cylindrical shells; Length of a plane curve; Area of a surface of revolution. 
Ph 1113     
Credit: 4.0    
Physics 
Contact hour: 4 hrs/week 
Wave and Oscillations: Wave and composition of simple harmonic motion, average value of kinetic and potential 
energies of a harmonic oscillation, superposition of simple harmonic motions; Types of wave: progressive and 
stationary wave, energy distribution due to progressive and stationary wave, interference of sound wave. 
Damped and Forced Harmonic Oscillator: Damped oscillatory system, damped harmonic oscillation, the LCR 
circuit, forced vibration, quality factor of forced oscillator, sharpness of resonance, phase of driven oscillator, power 
absorption. 
Particle Properties of Waves: Photoelectric effect, Quantum theory of light, Compton Effect. 
Wave Properties of Particles: De Broglie hypothesis, nature of De Broglie waves, phase velocity and group 
velocity. 
6 | P a g e 
Atomic Structure: Bohr’s atom model, Nature of electron orbits, Orbital energy, origin of spectral lines, different 
series of spectral lines of Hydrogen, Orbital energy level diagram of hydrogen atom, Correspondence principle, 
Vector atom model, Orbital states, space quantization, span quantization, Magnetic moment of orbital electron, 
Quantization of magnetic moment, Electron shell. 
Solid State Physics: Structure of crystals, Classification of solids, Einstein’s model of the lattice, specific heat of the 
solids, Debye’s model of the lattice heat capacity. Debye’s approximation of high temperature and low temperature; 
Outstanding properties of metals, Thermal conductivity, Momentum space, Fermi-Dirac distribution, Quantum theory 
of Free electron, escape of electron from a metal, Importance of Hall effect, Hall Voltage, and Hall coefficient, 
Mobility, Hall angle and drift velocity, velocity of electron according to Band theory. 
Nuclear Physics: Introduction, nuclear constituents, nuclear properties, binding energy, packing fraction, nuclear 
force, fission and fusion process. 
Radioactivity: Introduction to radioactivity, Laws of radioactive disintegration, half-life, Mean life, Laws of 
successive disintegration, Detection of radioactivity, Practical application of radioactivity, Biological effects of 
radiation, Safety measures in radioactivity. 
Ph 1114     
Credit: 0.75    
Experiments based on the theory of Ph 1113. 
MES 1114    
Credit: 0.75        
Sessional on Ph 1113 
Contact hour: 3/2 hrs/week 
Workshop Practices 
Contact hour: 3/2 hrs/week 
Acquaintance with tools and equipment used in machine shop; Practice of different operations on Lathe, Shaper, 
Drilling and Grinding machines. 
Acquaintance with tools and machines used in welding shop, practices on Arc and Gas welding. 
ESE 1100    
Credit: 1.50        
Engineering Drawing I 
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Fundamental principles and applications of Orthogonal projection; Oblique projection; Isometric projection; 
Auxiliary projection; Orthographic and auxiliary projection from pictorial views; pictorial projection from 
orthographic views, Development of objects. 
Fundamentals of building drawings, plan, elevation and sectional drawing. 
Reference Book: 
1. Mechanical Drawing by T. E. French, C. L. Svensen, J. D. Helsel and B. Urbanick, 10th Edition. 
2. Eng. Drawing and Graphic Technology by T. E. French, C. J. Vierck and R. J. Foster, 14th Edition. 
ESE 1101   
Credit: 3.0    
Energy Sources and potential 
Fundamentals of Energy Resources 
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week   
Earth energy cycle; Sources of energy for domestic, transportation, agriculture and industrial sector; History of 
energy usages, forms of energy, present consumption; Types of resources: conventional, non-conventional, 
commercial, non-renewable and renewable; Current status of conventional and non-conventional sources, World and 
Bangladesh scenario;  
Non-renewable Energy Sources 
Definition and types; Coal:   Formation of coal, potential, classification, exploration and uses; Oil: Formation, 
characteristics; potential, basic properties and grading; Natural Gas: Formation, potential and uses; Oil shale and tar 
7 | P a g e 
sands; Nuclear Resources: Types, potential and uses; Comparison of various conventional energy sources, their 
prospects and limitations.  
Renewable Energy Sources 
Definition; Solar Energy: formation, solar irradiance, solar constant, extraterrestrial and terrestrial radiation, 
applications, solar thermal conversion, solar heating and cooling; Solar photovoltaic: Basic operation, semi
conductor devices, electrical characteristics; Biomass Energy: Definitions,  resource potential, characteristics, 
biochemical and thermo-chemical conversion, charcoal production, biogas, ethanol fermentation, producer gas; 
Hydro Power: Resources, potential, applications, hydro electricity; Wind Energy: Formation, potential and uses; 
Types of wind turbines; Other Energy Sources: Geothermal Energy; Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC), Wave 
Energy, Tidal Energy. 
ESE 1102          
Credit: 0.75    
Sessional on ESE 1101 
Contact hour: 3/2 hrs/week 
Sessional based on the theory of ESE 1101. 
FIRST YEAR SECOND TERM 
Ch 1213     
Credit: 3.0        
Chemistry II 
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Chemical Kinetics: Order and molecularity of reaction, rate equations, for zero, first, second and third order reaction. 
Theories of reaction rates. reaction in solutions, kinetic model for non-elementary reactions.  
Photochemistry: Photon, law of photo chemistry, absorption law and mechanism of photochemical reaction, 
fluorescence, phosphorescence and chemiluminescence. 
Organic chemistry:  Hybridization of orbitals, electrophiles, nucleophiles and free radicles, isomerism, geometrical 
and optical isomers, polymerization, introduction to biochemical engineering and concept of biological catalysis, 
nature of microorganisms, their requirements and classification, industrially important microorganisms. Kinetics of 
enzyme catalyzed reactions. Batch fermentation: yield coefficients for biomass and product formation, rates of 
reaction, growth, limiting substrate concentrations. 
Corrosion: Introduction to corrosion, chemical corrosion, electrochemical corrosion of metals, corrosion rates, types 
of corrosion with properties and phenomenon, Factor affecting corrosion, corrosion in contact to soil, prevention of 
corrosion. 
Adsorption and Catalysis: Adsorption, types of adsorption, Adsorption isotherms; Fruendlich, Langmuir, and BET 
isotherms, Catalysis. 
Spectroscopy: Basic concept of Spectroscopy, Electronic, vibrational and rotational spectroscopy. 
EE 1213    
Credit: 4.00         
Electrical Circuits and Electronics 
Contact hour: 4 hrs/week 
Electrical Circuits 
Introduction:  Voltage, current, power, energy, independent and dependent sources, resistance. Basic laws: Ohm’s 
law, Kirchhoff’s current and voltage laws, Joule’s law. Simple resistive  circuits:  Series  and  parallel  circuits,  
voltage  and  current  division,  Wye-Delta transformation.  
Techniques of circuit analysis: Nodal and mesh analysis. Network theorems: Source  transformation,  Thevenin’s 
and  superposition  theorems  with  applications  in  circuits  having  independent  and  dependent  sources, Maximum 
power transfer.  
Energy storage elements:  Inductors and capacitors, series & parallel combination of inductors and capacitors.  
8 | P a g e 
Alternating Current circuits: Instantaneous, average and R.M.S values, complex impedance and phasor algebra. Real, 
reactive and apparent power, power factor. Series and parallel RL, RC and RLC circuits. Series and parallel 
resonance, energy analysis at resonance. 
Electronics 
Semiconductors: Intrinsic Semiconductors: Crystal and energy band diagram, conduction in semiconductors, 
Electron and hole concentration. Extrinsic semiconductors: n-type doping, p-type doping, and compensation doping. 
Drift and diffusion current, Mobility and Conductivity. The potential barrier; work function; contact potential. 
Semiconductor diode characteristics: Qualitative and Quantitative theory of the p-n junction as a diode; Ideal pn 
junction, pn junction band diagram, current components in p-n diode; Volt-ampere characteristics; Reverse 
breakdown; Avalanche and Zener breakdown; Zener diode, Special-Purpose Diodes: Schottky diode, Current 
regulator diode. 
Introduction  to  Logic  and  Digital  Circuits:  Logic  operations,  Basic  gates; OR,  AND,  NOT,  NAND,  NOR,  
X-OR;  Flip-Flops;  Shift  registers;  Counter; Binary and BCD code, Comparators. 
EE 1214     
Credit: 0.75        
Experiments based on the theory of EE 1213. 
Hum 1213    
Sessional on EE 1213 
Contact hour: 3/2 hrs/week 
Technical English 
Credit: 3.00    
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Vocabulary and Structure: Better reading skills, better writing skills, better speaking skills, word formation; roots, 
prefixes, suffixes, phrases and idioms; synonyms and antonyms; simple structures, complex and compound structure; 
Clauses, Identification and analysis of clauses, Notional language, Grammatical problems. 
Comprehension and Composition: Paragraph writing technique, formal and informal report writing, commercial 
correspondence; Memo, Letter; Application writing; Tender writing; Free composition writing; Précis writing; Term 
paper and Thesis/project report writing technique. 
Hum 1214    
Practical learning based on Hum 1213. 
Math 1213   
Sessional on Hum 1213 
Credit: 0.75    
Contact hour: 3/2 hrs/week 
Differential Equation and Co-ordinate Geometry 
Credit: 3.00    
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Differential Equations 
First-order ODEs: Introduction, Definition of differential equation, Classification based on type, order and linearity; 
General solution, initial and boundary value problem; Solution methods for Fist-order differential equations: 
Separable differential equations, Linear  differential equations; Solution using integrating factors; Exact differential 
equations; Homogeneous differential equations; Modeling using first-order equations: Electric circuits, Newton’s law 
of cooling, Radioactive decay.      
Second-order ODEs: Solutions of linear homogeneous equations with constant coefficients; Solution of linear non
homogeneous equations by various methods (general method, method of variation of parameters, and short method); 
Modeling using second-order equations: Free oscillation, Forced oscillations, RLC-circuits. 
Laplace Analysis: Definition and existence condition of Laplace transform. Properties of Laplace transform; 
Transform of elementary functions; Inverse Laplace transform and its properties; Convolution; Solution of ordinary 
and Laplace transform. 
Co-ordinate Geometry 
Two-dimensional geometry: Review of Cartesian and Polar co-ordinate systems, Transformation of co-ordinates: 
translation and rotation; General Equation of second degree; Identification of conics with their properties. 
Vector geometry: Study of Cartesian, Cylindrical polar and Spherical polar coordinate systems, their mutual 
conversion; Review of vector algebra, dot product, cross product; Distance between two points; Equation of line in 
three-dimensions using vectors, symmetrical form of a straight line, equation of plane using vectors; Angle between 
9 | P a g e 
line and plane, shortest distance between two lines, perpendicular distance of a point from a plane, angle between two 
planes.  
Reference Books:  
1. Advanced Engineering Mathematics by Erwin Kreyszig 
2. Advanced Modern Engineering Mathematics – by Glyn James 
3.Thomas’ Calculus – by George B. Thomas, Maurice D. Weir, Joel Hass, and Frank R. Giordano 
ESE 1205   
Thermodynamics for Energy Engineering 
Credit: 4.0    
Contact hour: 4 hrs/week 
Introduction and Basics: Macroscopic and microscopic viewpoints of thermodynamics; Definition of 
thermodynamic terms; Thermodynamic system; Heat and work and their path dependence; Pure substance and phase, 
property and phase diagrams, p-V-T surface; Ideal gas, its equation of state, law of corresponding states. 
Laws of thermodynamics: Zeroth law; First law and its mathematical forms, its application in closed and open 
system for different processes; Second law and its mathematical forms, heat engine and Carnot’s principles, Clausius 
inequality, application of second law in closed and open systems. 
Exergy Analysis: Definition and basic concepts of exergy, specific exergy; Exergy analysis of closed systems; 
Exergy analysis of open systems; Exergetic (second law) efficiency. 
Thermodynamic Relations: Virial, Van Der Waals, Redlich-Kwong (RK), and Soave-Redlich-Kwong (SRK) 
equation of state; Exact differentials and their properties, Maxwell relations; Volume expansivety, isothermal 
compressibility, isentropic compressibility, velocity of sound, Joule-Thomson coefficient. 
Thermodynamic Cycles Analysis: Carnot cycle; Rankine cycle, improving performance by superheat and reheat; 
Regenerative cycle; Air-standard Otto, Diesel cycle, Dual cycle, and Brayton cycle; Vapor compressional 
refrigeration cycle; Absorption refrigeration cycle.  
Mixture of Gases and Vapors: Mixture of ideal gases, gravimetric and volumetric analysis; Dalton’s law of partial 
pressure, volume and enthalpy of gaseous mixture; Isentropic process with gaseous mixtures; Adiabatic saturation 
process; Psychrometry: dry and wet bulb temperatures, specific humidity, relative humidity, dew point temperature, 
degree of saturation; Psychometric chart and its uses. 
Reference Books: 
1. Fundamentals of Engineering Thermodynamics – by Michael J. Moran, Howard N. Shapiro, Daisie D. Boettner, 
and Margaret B. Bailey  
2. Thermodynamics an Engineering Approach – by Yunus A. Cengel and Michael A. Boles 
3. Thermodynamics – by Gregory Nellis and Sanford Klein 
4. Basic and Applied Thermodynamics – by P.K. Nag 
ESE 1206    
Sessional on ESE 1205 
Credit: 0.75    
Experiments based on the theory of ESE 1205. 
ESE 1200    
Engineering Drawing II 
Credit: 1.50    
Contact hours: 3/2 hrs/week 
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Working Drawing of machine elements with sectional views, Sub-assembly and assembly drawing; Pipes and pipe 
fittings; Electrical circuit diagrams. These will be implemented using CAD Software. 
10 | P a g e 
SECOND YEAR FIRST TERM 
EE 2113    
Electrical Machines 
Credit: 3.0     
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Magnetic circuits: Flux, permeability and reluctance, magnetic field strength, magnetic potential, flux density, 
magnetization curve. Laws of magnetic circuits: Ohm’s law and Ampere’s circuital law.  
DC Generators: EMF equation, Principle of DC generators, description of different parts of DC generators, 
classification, Different types of winding, Armature reaction, losses and efficiency, parallel operation of DC 
generators.  
DC Motor:  Principle of operation, classification, losses and efficiency, Starting, Separately excited DC motor, 
Permanent magnet DC motor, speed control of DC motor.  
Transformer:  Constructional features and principles of operation, equivalent   circuit, losses and efficiency. Three 
phase transformer: Construction and operation, 3-phase connection of transformers. Short circuit test and open circuit 
test. 
Induction Motor: Rotating magnetic field, general principles, construction, equivalent circuits, squirrel cage and slip 
ring motors, torque developed, applications of single phase induction motor. 
Alternators:  Construction, theory of operation, armature  windings,  voltage  regulation, armature  reaction  and  
reactance,  control  of  excitation, losses  and  efficiency,  synchronizing  and  load  sharing, parallel operation, low 
power single-phase alternator. 
EE 2114    
Sessional on EE 2113 
Credit: 0.75    
Experiments based on the theory of EE 2113. 
Math 2113   
Contact hour: 3/2 hrs/week 
Linear Algebra and Vector Analysis 
Credit: 4.0     
Contact hour: 4 hrs/week 
Linear Algebra 
Basics: System of linear equations; matrix equation, vector equation; Gaussian elimination; row reduction and 
echelon forms; Matrices (rectangular, square, row, column, diagonal, triangular, symmetric, skew-symmetric) and 
Matrix Operations (equality, arithmetic product, transpose, trace); Determinants by cofactor expansion; Inverse of a 
matrix and inverse using adjoins.  
Vectors and Vector Spaces: Representation of vectors: tuple, column matrix, row matrix; Definition of vector space 
and its axioms; Subspaces; Linear dependency and independency, Basis and dimension of a vector space, Row space, 
column space and nullspace; Rank and nullity; Euclidian 𝑛-space and its properties, Euclidian inner product and 
norm, Cauchy-Schwarz inequality in ℝ𝑛; Linear transformations and it’s properties; Application of Linear 
transformation in reflection, projection, rotation, dilation and contraction. 
Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors: Definition of eigenvalue and eigenvectors; Characteristic equation and characteristic 
polynomial, Evaluation of eigenvectors and bases for eigenspace; Diagonalization; Orthogonal diagonalization.   
Vector Analysis  
Vector-valued functions: Definition of vector-valued functions, their geometrical representation-space curves; 
Differentiation rules for vector-valued functions; Integration rules for vector-valued functions. Space curve analysis: 
unit tangent vector, unit normal vector, unit binormal vector. 
Gradient, Divergence, Curl: Definition, graphical representation of functions with two and three variables, level 
curves, level surface, contour curves, contour surfaces; Definition of scalar field with examples; Review of partial 
differentiation; Directional derivative and its geometrical interpretation, Gradient of a function of several variables, 
Geometrical interpretation of gradient and gradient field; Equation of tangent plane, Vector fields: Definition and 
examples, Partial derivatives of vector fields, Divergence and curl of vector fields. 
11 | P a g e 
Vector Integration: Line integrals, surface integrals, volume integrals, double integration and triple integration; 
Jacobean of the transformation; Stokes’ theorem, Greens’ theorem, divergence theorem of Gauss and problems 
related to them. 
Reference Books: 
1. Elementary Linear Algebra by Howard Anton, Chris Rorres.  
2. Linear Algebra and Its Applications by David C. Lay  
3. Vector Analysis – by Murray R. Spiegel, Seymour Lipschutz, and Dennis Spellman   
4. Thomas’ Calculus – by George B. Thomas, Maurice D. Weir, Joel Hass, and Frank R. Giordano 
ME 2113    
Statics and Solid Mechanics  
Credit: 3.0    
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Statics: 
Introduction: Fundamental concepts and principle of transmissibility; Resolution of force into components; 
Resultant of concurrent force systems; Free body diagram, Equilibrium of a particle. 
Equilibrium of rigid bodies: Non-concurrent force system, Moment of a force, equilibrium of non-concurrent and 
parallel force systems; Moment of a couple; equivalent couple; force couple systems; reduction of forces system to 
force couple system; Analysis of structure:  Trusses. 
Center of gravity: Centroid of area and volume, Pappus-Guldinus theorem.  
Moment of inertia: Inertia of area and mass; radius of gyration; parallel axes theorem; product of inertia. 
Law of friction: Equilibrium under frictional resistance, sliding friction; Wedges, belt frictions.  
Solid Mechanics: 
Stress and Strain: Introduction; Analysis of internal forces; Tensile, compressive, bearing and shearing stresses; 
Stresses in thin-walled pressure cylinder; Stress-strain diagram; Axial and biaxial deformations; Thermal stresses. 
Statically Determinate Beams: Different types of loading and supports; Shear force and bending moment diagrams; 
Stresses in beams, flexure formula, economic sections, shearing stresses in beams, general shear formula; variation of 
shearing stresses in beams; Deflection of beams, double integration. 
Torsion: Introduction; Torsion formula; Angle of twist; Shaft couplings and helical springs; Analysis and design of 
circular shaft. 
Columns: Introduction; Critical load, slenderness ratio and classification of columns; Euler’s formula. 
Reference. Books: 
1. Vector Mechanics for Engineers: Statics – by Ferdinand P. Beer & E. Russell Johnston, Jr. 
2. Mechanics of Materials – by R.C. Hibbeler  
3. Strength of Materials – by Andew Pytel and Ferdinad L. Singer 
ME 2114    
Sessional on ME 2113 
Credit: 0.75    
Experiments based on the theory of ME 2113. 
ME 2115    
Fluid Mechanics  
Credit: 3.0    
Contact hour: 3/2 hrs/week 
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Introduction and Basics: Definition of a fluid and fluid mechanics, fluid as a continuum, Fundamental concepts: 
Stress and rate of strain, Viscosity and Newton’s law of viscosity, No-slip and no-temperature jump condition, scalar 
and vector fields; Important Fluid properties; Fluid forces: body and surface forces, their mathematical representation. 
Fluid Statics: Condition for fluid statics, pressure at a point, basic equation for pressure field, pressure variation in 
fluid at rest; Manometers: U-tube, inclined-tube, Bourdon pressure gage; Buoyancy. 
Fluid Dynamics and Bernoulli Equation: Lagrangian and Eulerian view of fluid flow, Velocity field, Acceleration 
field, Material derivative; Classification of fluid motion; Concept of streamlines and streamtubes, Pathlines, 
12 | P a g e 
Streaklines, and timelines; Deformation of fluid elements, Vorticity, and Rotationality; Continuity equation, Euler 
equation; Navier-Stokes equation; Bernoulli’s equation: derivation, application along and across streamlines, its 
limitations; Static, dynamic, and stagnation pressures; Energy grade line and Hydraulic grade line. 
Control Volume Analysis: Reynolds transport theorem: derivation and interpretation; Concept of systems and 
control volumes, Derivational and application of integral forms of conservation laws for mass, energy, linear 
momentum, and angular momentum.  
External Viscous Flow: General characteristics of flow past an object and concept of boundary-layer, boundary
layer thicknesses; Momentum integral equation boundary-layer analysis: flow with zero pressure gradient, flow with 
pressure gradient; Concept drag and drag coefficient, friction drag, pressure drag, streamlining; Concept of 
circulation, lift, and lift coefficient.  
Reference Books: 
1. Fluid Mechanics by Yunus A. Cengel and John M. Cimbala. 3rd Edition   
2. Fundamentals of Fluid Mechanics by Bruce R. Munson, Donald F. Young, Theodore H. Okiisi, and Wade W. 
Huebsch, 6th Edition  
3. Introduction to Fluid Mechanics by Robert W. Fox, Philip J. Pritchard, and Alan T. McDonald. 8th Edition 
ME 2116    
Sessional on ME 2115 
Credit: 0.75    
Experiments based on the theory of ME 2115. 
CSE 2113    
Computer Programming  
Credit: 3.0    
Contact hour: 3/2 hrs/week 
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
*Out of two only one programming language will be adopted based on department’s decision during a particular term   
Programming with C 
Introduction:  Programming languages, compilers, and pseudo-compilers.  
Programming paradigm: Structured, object oriented programming, structure of C++ programming. 
Data Types and Operator: Declaring variables of different data types and doing different types of operations on them, facing 
problems when internal result of calculation crosses the boundary of a data type.  
Data Input/Output: Variation and formats of getting input and giving output.  
Debugging: Program debugging and testing.  
Control Statements: Implementation of all types of control statement structures such as if, else-if, nested else-if, switch, 
goto, while, do-while, for, etc. 
Arrays: single and multi- dimensional arrays and their applications: matrix manipulation, sorting of data; String:  finding 
vowel and consonant from a given string, detecting palindrome, counting words of a string, reversing each words of a sentence, 
using different functions of string.h library.   
Functions: Doing some previous problems using function, passing arguments by value and by reference.   
Recursion: Find Greatest Common Divisor, Fibonacci, Factorial, and Tower of Hanoi.   
Program Structure: Use static and global variable.  
Pointers:  Dynamic memory allocation, arrays of pointers, passing pointers to a function; 
Structures and Unions: Data processing using structures and union, linked lists;  
File: Opening, closing, creating and processing data files.  Introduction to low-level programming 
Or 
Programming with Octave 
Introduction: Programming languages, compilers vs. pseudo-compilers, octave as programming language. 
Octave environment: named variables, numbers and formatting, number representation and accuracy, loading and saving 
data, repeating previous commands, getting help, cancelling a command, semicolons and hiding answers. 
Arrays and vectors: building vectors, colon notation, displaying large vectors and matrices, vector creation functions, 
extracting elements from a vector, vector math. 
Plotting graphs: single graph, multiple graphs, multiple figures, manual scaling, saving and printing figures. 
13 | P a g e 
Script files: creating and editing a script, running and debugging scripts, remembering previous scripts. 
Control statements: if...else selection, switch selection, for loops, while loops, accuracy and precision. 
Functions: creating and using functions. 
Matrices and vectors: matrix multiplication, the transpose operator, matrix creation functions, building composite matrices, 
matrices as tables, extracting bits of matrices. 
Solving Ax = b: Solution when A is invertible, Gaussian elimination and LU factorization, Matrix division and the slash 
operator, Singular matrices and rank, Ill-conditioning, Over-determined systems: Least squares, Triangulation. 
Eigenvectors and the Singular Value Decomposition: The eig function, The Singular Value Decomposition; Approximating 
matrices: Changing rank, the SVD function, Economy SVD. 
Complex numbers: Plotting complex numbers, finding roots of polynomials. 
CSE 2114    
Sessional on CSE 2113 
Credit: 1.50    
Experiments based on the theory of CSE 2113. 
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
SECOND YEAR SECOND TERM 
EE 2213    
Power Electronics  
Credit: 4.0    
Contact hour: 4 hrs/week 
Transistor: Transistor and its current components, BJT characteristics and different regions of operation, different 
transistor configurations, transistor as a switch and amplifier, transistor biasing, DC and AC load lines, thermal 
stabilization. 
FET: Introduction, Construction and characteristics, MOSFET: depletion type and enhancement type, biasing. 
Semiconductor power devices: SCRs, TRIACS, power MOSFET and IGBT, DIAC.  
AC to DC controlled converter:  Single phase and three phase half wave, full wave and semi-converter, phase 
control, characteristics, harmonics, power factor control and converter triggering circuits. 
AC to AC controlled converter: On-off and phase control, single phase and three phase power controllers and 
cycloconverter. 
DC to DC converter: Chopper, characteristics and operation of step up and step down choppers, switching converter 
and power regulators. 
Inverter: Three phase and single phase voltage source and current source inverters, modulation techniques, voltage, 
frequency and harmonic control, PWM inverters, resonant converter, space vector modulation in three phase 
inverters. 
EE 2214    
Sessional on EE 2213 
Credit: 0.75    
Experiments based on the theory of EE 2213. 
Hum2213           
Economics and Accounting  
Credit: 3.0    
Contact hour: 3/2 hrs/week 
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Economics 
Micro Economics: Definition and principle of economics; Basic economic ideas and resources allocation in different 
economic systems; Production possibility curves; Elasticity of demand and supply analysis; Price system and micro 
economy; Price determination, cost of production and market behavior analysis; Government microeconomic 
intervention; production, production function, types of productivity; Internal and external economics and 
diseconomies. 
14 | P a g e 
Macro Economics: National income analysis, savings and investment; inflation and monetary policy; Fiscal policy 
and trade policy with reference to Bangladesh; NPV, IRR, payback period, cost benefit ratio and their application. 
Energy Project Appraisal: Causes and analysis; Social and environmental cost and benefit analysis of energy 
projects and their impact analysis. 
Accounting 
Introduction:  Meaning and Importance of Accounting. 
Accounting Equations: Some relevant accounting principles; 
Accounting Cycle: Journal–Ledger, Trial balance, Final Financial Accounts (Income statement and balance sheet), 
Considering adjustment of entries. 
Depreciation: Methods of depreciation, straight line and reducing balance method. 
Costing: Concept and classification of costs; Labor, overhead and job costing; Marginal costing; Operating costing; 
Salaries and wages. 
Math 2213   
Complex Variables and Fourier Analysis 
Credit: 3.0    
Contact hours: 3 hrs/week 
Complex Analysis: Functions; limits; continuity; complex differentiation, analytic function, Cauchy Riemann 
equation, harmonic function, orthogonal family of curves; Singular points, Complex integration, Cauchy’s theorem, 
Cauchy’s integral formula. 
Bessel’s Function: Bessel’s differential equation; Bessel’s function of first kind, its properties and recurrence 
relations. 
Fourier Analysis: Euler Fourier series representation of function, Condition for existence of Fourier Series, Fourier 
series of different periods, Fourier series for even and odd functions, half range Fourier Series, complex form of 
Fourier series, Parseval’s theorem 
Partial Differential Equations: Formation and classification of PDEs; Solution of one dimensional heat equations; 
Solution of Laplace’s equation in 2-dimensional Cartesian and polar coordinates with their application in heat 
distribution. 
Reference Books: 
1. Advanced Modern Engineering Mathematics – by Glyn James 
2.  
Advanced Engineering Mathematics – by Erwin Kreyszig  
ME 2213   
Dynamics and Kinematics of Machineries   
Credit: 3.00    
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Kinematics of particles: Motion of particle, rectilinear and curvilinear motion; motion of several particles, 
rectangular components of velocity and acceleration; Motion relative to frame in translation; tangential, normal, 
radial and transverse components. 
Kinetics of particles: Newton’s second law of motion, linear and angular momentum, radial and transverse 
components of motion. 
Kinematics of rigid bodies: Translation; rotation about a fixed axis; general plane motion, motion about a fixed 
point and general motion; Absolute velocity and acceleration, relative velocity and acceleration; Principle of work 
and energy and its application; Power and efficiency; Potential energy, conservative forces; Conservation of energy 
and its application; Principle of impulse and momentum; Direct and oblique central impact. 
Kinetics of rigid bodies: Plane motion of rigid bodies; Equation of motion, angular momentum and D’Alembert 
principle, constrained plane motion; Work of forces acting on a rigid body, Kinetic energy of rigid body in plane 
motion; Principle of work and energy for the plane motion, principle of impulse and momentum for plane motion; 
Concentric impact. 
Mechanics of Machinery: Inertia and kinetic energy of rotation and reciprocating parts; Turning moment diagram, 
fluctuation of energy and speed; Fly wheel; Balancing of stationary, rotating and reciprocating masses, balancing of 
15 | P a g e 
In-line engines and V-engines; Law of gearing forms of tooth and types of gear; Gear trains and their arrangements; 
Types of governors and their control. 
ME 2214    
Sessional on ME 2213 
Credit: 0.75    
Experiments based on the theory of ME 2213. 
ESE 2209   
Contact hour: 3/2 hrs/week 
Bio and Wind Energy Engineering  
Credit: 3.0    
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Bio-energy 
Introduction: Concept of biomass and bio-fuel, its characteristics, heating value and composition, bio-energy, 
photosynthetic efficiency, potential of biomass sources, advantages and disadvantages, energy plantations; Types of 
sources. 
Bio-chemical Conversion: Need of conversion and types; anaerobic digestion – BOD, COD, digester design, biogas 
production and its feedstock, microbial and biochemical aspects, operating parameters for biogas production, types of 
digesters, digesters for rural application, high rate digesters for industrial waste; Ethanol production by fermentation 
cane molasses and other sources, dry fermentation. 
Thermo-chemical Conversion: Pyrolysis: fixed and fluidized bed pyrolysis, reactor design, carbonization, 
densification, briquetting, preparation of feedstock, torrified product, bio-coal; Gasification and its types; 
Incineration. 
Modern uses of Biomass: Processing for oils and fats, bio-diesel technology, transesterification, Gasohol as a 
substitute for petrol, chemical composition of bio-diesel; Cogeneration systems. 
Wind Energy 
Assessing Wind Resources: Basics of wind generation, air density as function of elevation and humidity; Study of 
Wind profiles - simple log profile, the power law, roughness length, roughness change model, displacement height, 
wind shear, Weibull distribution of wind speed; Basic terms and definitions related to wind measurement, wind speed 
measuring instruments and their principle.       
Wind Energy Conversion Systems: Classification of wind turbines and their comparison; Horizontal axis wind 
turbine - major components and angles; Aerodynamic behavior of turbine blades - airfoil terminology, lift, drag, tip 
speed ratio, flow over airfoil; Vertical axis turbines; Turbine design, One-dimensional momentum theory and Bitz 
limit, power coefficient, thrust coefficient, overall efficiency, overall power output.  
Wind energy project and Environment: Major phases of a wind farm project, activities and cost associated with 
each phase; Impact of WEC projects on environment.   
ESE 2210    
Sessional on ESE 2209 
Credit: 0.75    
Experiments based on the theory of ESE 2209. 
ESE 2230        
Contact hour: 3/2 hrs/week 
Energy Engineering Simulation I 
Credit: 0.75    
Contact hour: 3/2 hrs/week 
Solution of Energy Science and Engineering problems using standard simulation software. 
16 | P a g e 
THIRD YEAR FIRST TERM 
Math 3113   
Statistics and Numerical Methods  
Credit: 3.00    
Contact hour: 3hrs/week 
Statistics: 
Basic Statistics: Review of data, Events, Variables; Population and Samples; Grouped data, Ungrouped data, 
Frequency distribution: Relative and cumulative; Average, Median, Mode, Standard deviation, Moment, Skewness, 
Peakedness and Coefficient of variation of grouped data. 
Basic Probability: Brief overview of sets, Venn diagrams and set operations, Axioms of probability, Probability 
rules, Conditional probability and Independent events, Bayes formula. Statistical distributions and their uses: 
Introduction to probability density functions and their physical significance, Geometric, Binomial, Poisson, Normal, 
Uniform, Exponential distributions. 
Numerical Methods: 
Roots and Optimization: Bisection and Newton-Raphson method; Use of root finding functions in Octave – fzero, 
roots, poly, polyval; Basics of optimization and golden-search technique; Use of root optimization functions in 
Octave – fminbnd, fminsearch.   
Solution of Linear Equation: Gaussian elimination and pivoting, LU decomposition; Diagonal dominance and 
condition number of a matrix, Gauss-Seidel and Jacobi method; Use of Octave functions for solution of linear 
systems.   
Curve Fitting and Interpolation: Linear and polynomial regression; Newton’s formulae for forward and backward 
interpolation, Lagrange’s interpolation method; Use of curve-fitting functions in Octave – interp, polyfit, 
spline. 
Numerical Calculus: Forward, backward and central difference formula for first and second order derivative; 
Trapezoidal rule, Simpson’s rule for integration; Euler, Heun, and Runge-Kutta methods solving initial –value 
problems, basics of boundary vale problem and shooting method. Use Octave functions – quad, ode45, ode15s, and 
bvp4c; Application of numerical calculus to problems from fluid mechanics, heat transfer, and control engineering. 
Reference Books –  
1. Applied Statistics and Probability for Engineers, 6th Ed. – Douglas C. Montgomery and George C. 
2. Applied Numerical Methods with MATLAB for Engineers and Scientists, 3rd Ed. – by Steven C. Chapra.    
3. Numerical Methods for Engineers and Scientists, 3rd Ed. – Amos Gilat, Vish Subramaniam. 
Math 3114    
Sessional on Math 3113 
Credit: 1.50    
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Computer applications on the problems based on the theory of Math 3113. 
EE 3113    
Power System Engineering  
Credit: 3.0    
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Introduction to Power System: Basics of Power System Engineering, Electrical supply system, AC and DC power 
supply schemes. 
Transmission lines: Flux linkages, inductance due to external flux, and inductance of single-phase two-wire line. 
Electric field, capacitance of two wire line, effect of earth, representation of lines: short, medium and long 
transmission lines, T and π representation. Sag and stress analysis, effect of wind and ice loading, supports at 
different elevation, conditions of erection, effects of temperature changes, corona & corona power loss. 
Insulators for overhead lines: Types of insulators, potential distribution in a string of insulators, string efficiency, 
methods of equalizing potential distribution. 
17 | P a g e 
Load flow and fault analysis: P.U. method of performance calculation, P.U. impedance of three winding 
transformers, and Power flow in simple systems, voltage and frequency controls. Symmetrical three phase faults on 
synchronous machine, Unsymmetrical Faults: Single line to ground fault, line to line fault, double line to ground 
fault. 
Circuit breakers and fuse: Circuit breakers’ types, ratings, constructions, and selections. Arc extinction, recovery 
voltage. Constructions, characteristics, and applications of commercially available fuses. Types, construction, 
operating principle of over current relays. Lightning arrestors, surge absorbers, ground wire, generators grounding. 
Introduction to Smart grid:  Definition, key functions of smart grid, smart grid’s control elements and their 
operations, smart grid’s communications and cyber security. 
Reference Books: 
1. Mehta. Principles of Power System- V.K.Mehta and Rohit Mehta  
2. Elements of Power System Analysis, 4th Ed-William D. Stevenson 
3. Electrical Power Systems- C.L. Wadhwa 
EE 3114    
Sessional on EE 3113 
Credit: 0.75    
Experiments based on the theory of EE 3113. 
ESE 3105    
Contact hour: 3/2 hrs/week 
Heat Transfer and Mass Transfer 
Credit: 4.00    
Contact hour: 4hrs/week 
Introduction: Basic modes of heat transfer; Thermal properties of materials. 
Conduction: Law of conduction, Heat conduction equations in one, two and three dimensions; Solution of steady 
heat flow with and without heat generation, Consideration of variable thermal conductivity; Composite walls; Heat 
transfer augmentation, fins of uniform cross-sections, critical thickness of insulation; Unsteady heat conduction, Use 
of Heisler’s chart. 
Convection: Review of hydrodynamic equations for boundary layer theory, Analysis of thermal boundary layer by 
control volume method; Laminar heat transfer over flat plate; Fully developed flow heat transfer through smooth 
pipes, Cases of constant heat flux and constant wall temperature boundary conditions; Applications of dimensionless 
numbers; Correlation of heat transfer in turbulent flow; Use of hydraulic diameter. Correlations for free and forced 
convection heat transfer over horizontal and vertical plates, cylinders, spheres and inclined pipes; Horizontal and 
vertical tube bundles in cross flow. 
Heat transfer with change of phase: Condensation. Drop-wise and film-wise condensation, their effect on heat 
transfer rate; Effect of film turbulence; Nusselt equations, condensation number; Melting and solidification; Boiling: 
Types of boiling; Processes of bubble growth and bubble dynamics; Pool and film boiling; boiling curve, boiling with 
vapor production, critical heat flux; Forced convection boiling in horizontal and vertical tubes; Heat transfer rate in 
different boiling phenomena. 
Mass Transfer: Introduction, Fick’s law of diffusion; Binary diffusion. Mass transfer coefficient; Basics of 
absorption, distillation and adsorption. 
Reference Books: 
1. Fundamentals of Heat and Mass Transfer, 7th Ed. – Frank P. Incropera, David P. DeWitt et al. 
2. Heat and Mass Transfer, Fundamentals & Application, 5th Ed. – Yunus A. Cengel and Afshin J. Ghajar 
3. Heat Transfer – Gregory Nellis and Sanford Klein 
4. Heat Transfer – NecatiOzisik 
ESE 3106    
Credit: 0.75     
Sessional on ESE 3105 
Experiments based on the theory of ESE 3105. 
Contact hour: 3/2 hrs/week 
18 | P a g e 
ESE 3107    
Solar Thermal Engineering 
Credit: 3.00    
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Introduction: Review of sun-earth geometry, variation of extraterrestrial radiation, beam and diffuse radiation, 
direction of beam radiation, 𝑅𝑏 factor, total radiation on horizontal and inclined surfaces, variation of radiation, 
monthly average values, estimation of daily average daily total radiation, KT method, hourly radiation from daily 
data. 
Heat Transfer Concepts: Theory of thermal radiation, Radiation properties, Planck’s law, Wien’s displacement law, 
Stefan-Boltzmann equation; Concept of black body and gray body; Spectral dependence of radiation properties; 
Kirchhoff’s law; Shape factor; Radiation exchange between surfaces, Re-radiating surfaces; Radiation shields. 
Flat Plate Collectors: Introduction, construction methodology and classification; Critical radiation level; Mean fluid 
temperature; Overall heat loss coefficient; Energy balance equation of FPC; Effective transmittance-absorptance 
product; Testing of collector, collector efficiency factor; Heat removal factor and flow factor; Heat capacity factor in 
FPC; Optimum inclination of FPC. Evacuated tube cover collector, Evacuated-tubular collector, thermal efficiency, 
evacuated tube with heat pipe. 
Concentrating Collectors: Introduction, characteristic parameters; Concentration ratio, optical efficiency; 
Classification of concentrators; Tracking of concentrators, tracking methods; Thermal analysis; Materials for 
concentrators. 
Application: Solar water heating, heat collection in storage tank, effect of heat load; Solar air heating, room heating, 
crop heating; Solar distillation, working principle and thermal efficiency; Solar cooling; Solar thermal power 
generation schemes; Central receiver power plants; Dish Stirling systems; Solar ponds, Thermal analysis of solar 
power plants. 
Reference Books: 
1. Solar Engineering of Thermal Process - J. A. Duffie, W. A. Beckman, John Wiley & Sons Inc 
2. Solar Energy: Fundamentals, Design, Modeling and Applications –G. N. Tiwari, Narosa Publishing House 
3. Solar Energy Engineering,2nd Edition -Soteris A. Kalogirou, Academic Press 
ESE 3108    
Sessional on ESE 3107 
Credit: 0.75    
Experiments based on the theory of ESE 3107. 
ESE 3123    
Thermo-fluid Devices 
Credit: 3.00    
Contact hour: 3/2 hrs/week 
Contact hours: 3 hrs/week 
Pipe flow: Buckingham 𝜋 theorem; Hydraulic diameter, flow regimes based on Reynolds number; Laminar flow in 
pipes, entrance region and velocity profile, fully developed flow and average velocity, pressure drop and head loss; 
Turbulent velocity profile in pipes, use of Moody Chart and Colebrook equation; Major and minor losses; Flow rate 
and velocity measurement – pitot tube, obstruction flow meters, rotameter, turbine flow meters. 
Compressible flow: Distinction between compressible and incompressible flow, One-dimensional isentropic 
compressible flow; Variation of flow velocity with area, flow through converging-diverging nozzle and chocking; 
Shock wave. 
Pump Compressor and Blowers: Classification of turbomachinery; Water horsepower, brake horsepower, 
efficiency for pumps; Pump performance curve, pump sizing for piping systems; Cavitation and NPSH; Pump 
Scaling laws, pump specific speed, affinity laws; Fans, blowers and compressors, compressor intercooling. 
Heat Exchangers: Classification of heat exchangers, Overall heat transfer coefficient, fouling factor; Analysis using 
LMTD and NTU method, Design of double-pipe heat exchangers, shell-and-tube heat exchangers and TEMA 
standards; Plate heat exchangers.  
Reference Books: 
1. Fluid Mechanics Fundamentals and Applications, 3rd ED. – Yunus A. Cengel, John M. Cimbala. 
2. Fox and McDonald’s Introduction to Fluid Mechanics, 8th ED. – Philip J. Pritchard, John C. Leylegian.      
3. Fundamentals of Heat and Mass Transfer, 7th ED. – Frank P. Incropera, David P. DeWitt et al. 
4. Process Heat Transfer Principle, Application and Rules of Thumb, 2nd ED – Robert W. Serth, Thomas G. Lestine. 
19 | P a g e 
5. Heat Transfer in Process Engineering – Eduardo Cao. 
ESE 3124    
Sessional on ESE 3123 
Credit: 0.75    
Contact hour: 3/2 hrs/week 
Experiments based on the theory of ESE 3123 and design problems related ESE 3123. 
THIRD YEAR SECOND TERM 
ESE 3200    
Seminar on Special Topics 
Credit: 0.75    
Contact hour: 3/2 hrs/week 
The department will arrange special lectures on recent research and technology in the field of energy engineering by 
the expert from inside or outside of the university for the students. Students are required to perform case studies on 
topics pertaining to energy science and engineering. At the end of the semester, each student will hand in a report and 
give presentation of his or her study.  
ESE 3202    
Energy Innovation Lab 
Credit: 0.75    
Contact hour: 3/2 hrs/week 
The student will fabricate a model of a system using their innovative idea under guidance of a faculty. At the end of 
the semester, each student will hand in a report and give presentation of his or her project for evaluation. 
ESE 3203   
Petroleum and Natural Gas Processing 
Credit: 3.00    
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Petroleum: Composition of Petroleum; thermal properties of petroleum, important product properties and test 
methods; Dehydration of Crude Oil, Desalting of Crude Oil, Crude Oil Stabilization and Sweetening, distillation of 
petroleum, ADU, VDU, blending of gasoline; fraction-impurities, treatment of gasoline, treatment of kerosene, wax 
and purification; Cracking, catalytic cracking, catalytic reforming, naphtha cracking, cooking, hydrogen processes, 
and alkylation processes isomerization processes. 
Natural Gas: Origin of natural gas, Properties of natural gas, overview of the natural gas industries in Bangladesh. 
Gas and Liquid Separation: Separation Equipment, Types of separators, Separation principles, Factors affecting 
separation, Separator design, Low temperature separation, Two-phase Gas-Oil Separation, Three-Phase Oil-Water
Gas. 
Dehydration Processes: Dehydration of natural gas, Gas hydrates, Hydrate inhibition, Absorption dehydration, 
Adsorption dehydration. 
Desulfurization Processes: Sweetening of natural gas, Sour gas treating, Sulfur removal processes, Solid bed 
sweetening processes, Physical absorption and chemical absorption process. 
Gas Flow Measurements and Control: Fundamentals of gas flow through conduits, orifice meter, Flow control and 
pressure regulating instruments. 
LNG and LPG: Basics, Properties, Composition, Liquefaction technologies, Production processes, LNG carrier, 
LPG cylinders/tanks/vessels, Storage and handling, LPG cylinder sizing, Fire hazards, Safety legislation, Commercial 
and industrial uses. 
Lube oil:  Lube Oil Base Stocks, Lube oil processing, Propane de-asphalting, solvent extraction, De-waxing, 
Specifications of lube oil, Lube Additives. 
Reference Books: 
1.Modern Petroleum Refining Processes,5th Ed.- B. K. BhaskaraRao 
2. Gas Production Engineering- Sanjay Kumar, Gulf Publishing Company 
3. Petroleum Refining Technology- Ram Prasad , Khanna Publishers 
4. Petroleum Refinery Engineering -Nelson, W. L. 
20 | P a g e 
5. Gas Conditioning and Processing- John M. Campbell  
ESE 3204    
Sessional on ESE 3203 
Credit: 0.75    
Experiments based on the theory of ESE 3203. 
ESE 3207    
Contact hour: 3/2 hrs/week 
Solar Photovoltaic System  
Credit: 3.00    
Contact hour: 3hrs/week 
Introduction: PV physics, band structure and Fermi level in semiconductors, pn-junctions, diode models, photon 
interactions with semiconductors. 
PV Cell Fundamentals: Working principle, Computing PV cell power, equivalent circuit models, short- and open
circuit properties, fill factor, and parasitic resistances. PV cell external and internal quantum efficiency, and 
computing the spectral response. Theoretical cell efficiency, multi-junction devices, the Shockley-Queisser limit. 
Antireflection coatings, cell passivation, and cell optical properties. 
PV Technology: PV cell architecture and fabrication steps, characterization techniques crystalline Si substrates, thin 
film deposition, amorphous Si, CIGS, and CdTe thin-film cells. 
PV Systems: Introduction to PV systems, Location and orientation issues, factor affecting performance, PV cells 
wired in series and parallel, shaded and faulty cell effects, Components of PV systems, system integration- online and 
offline, inverters, design criteria, calculation, economics and ecology of PV system, load analysis, life cycle analysis 
and cost estimation. 
Reference Books:  
1., Solar Photovoltaic System Applications: A Guidebook for Off-Grid Electrification -Mohanty, Parimita, Muneer, 
Tariq, Kolhe. Mohan L. 
2.. Solar Photovoltaic Technology And Systems - Chetan Singh Solanki 
3. Photovoltaic Systems Engineering - Roger A. Messenger 
ESE 3208    
Sessional on ESE 3207 
Credit: 0.75    
Experiments based on the theory of ESE 3207. 
ESE 3211    
Coal Power Generation 
Credit: 4.00    
Contact hour: 3/2 hrs/week 
Contact hour: 4 hrs/week 
Introduction: Types of Coal and their Characteristics; Geology of coal; evaluation of coal for different uses; 
proximate and ultimate analysis of coal; Overview of coal power in Bangladesh and world; Role of coal in the overall 
energy situation.  
Coal and Ash Handling: Necessity of coal handling system, Out-plant handling, Coal preparation, Coal Transfer, 
Coal storage, In-plant handling, Coal feeding arrangements; Bottom ash, Fly ash, Ash handling systems; Fundamental 
Concept of Control and Monitoring of Ash handling Plant; Dust collection and its disposal, Types of dust collectors 
and their working principle. 
Coal Combustion: Coal burning furnaces, Firing Methods, Types of stokers and their working principle, 
Combustion Mechanism, Kinetics of Combustion Reactions, Combustion equipments for Burning of coal, Pulverized 
coal, Various pulverizing mills, screening, mechanical and thermal dewatering, Pulverized coal firing systems, 
Pulverized coal burners. 
Clean Coal Technology: Introduction to clean coal technologies, Pre-Combustion Coal Cleaning and Capture of 
CO2, Post-Combustion Capture of CO2, Carbon Capture and Oxyfuel Combustion, CO2 Compression, Transportation 
and Sequestration. Combustion Strategies to Reduce NOX Production, Capture of SO2 and NOX, Combined SO2 and 
NOX Removal, Mercury Removal, International Regulations of Coal-Fired Emissions, Advanced Pulverized Coal
Fired Power Plants, Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle Systems. 
Steam Generators: Introduction to Power Station Steam Generators, Boiler classification, general design 
considerations, boiler specifications, working principle of Fire tube and water tube boilers, high pressure and 
supercritical boilers, positive circulation boilers, fluidized bed boiler, waste heat recovery boiler, major boiler 
mountings and accessories, boiler efficiency.  
21 | P a g e 
Steam turbines: Types, Impulse and reaction turbine, convergent and divergent nozzles, Stage efficiency, Degree of 
reaction. Performance of steam turbines. Compounding of turbines, optimum velocity ratio, reheat factor and 
condition line, loses in steam turbine, Steam turbine governing,  
Reference Books:  
1. P. Breeze. 2015. Coal-Fired Generation, 1st Edition. Academic Press, USA. 
2.P. Jayarama Reddy. 2013. Clean Coal Technologies for Power Generation. 1st edition, CRC Press. 
3.B. Miller and B. Miller. 2010. Clean Coal Engineering Technology , 1st Edition, Butterworth-Heinemann 
4. Thermal Engineering – P.L. Ballaney 
5. Steam Turbine - Kearton 
ESE 3217   
Instrumentation and Control  
Credit: 3.00    
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Instrumentation: Functional elements of a measurement system; Sensors for temperature, flow, velocity, linear 
distance, level, pressure, force, pH measurement; Control valve sizing and selection; Control signal transmission and 
related industry standards; Study of piping instrument diagram (P&ID); Basic components of Data acquisition 
system, Error analysis and calibrations. 
Dynamic Modeling: Review of conservation and constitutive laws of energy systems and dynamic modeling; 
Linearization ODEs, Review of Laplace Transform, evaluate transfer function and input-output model; Analysis of 
first and second order systems – graphical and optimization fit, State-space modelling.  
Controller Design: Basics of feedback control; P, PI, and PID controller design, tuning, and troubleshooting; 
Frequency response analysis and control system design, Stability analysis; Basics of cascade control; fuzzy logic, 
control structure. 
Automation: Introduction of PLC, PLC Hardware, Definitions of Allen-Bradley conditional inputs and outputs, I/O 
configuration, Programming Terminals and Peripherals, Application of PLC in Automation, Automation system 
components, Industrial communications, Continuous control, overview of SCADA and DCS systems; 
Microcontroller basics, classification, basic Architecture, memory, registers, I/O ports. 
Reference Books -  
1. Process Dynamics and Control, 4th Ed. – Dale.E. Seborg, Thomas F. Edgar et al. 
2. Process Control, 2nd Ed. – Thomas E. Marlin 
3. Schaum's Outline of Feedback and Control Systems, 2nd Ed. - Allen J. Stubberud Ivan J. Williams Joseph J. 
DiStefano  
4.Programmable Logic Controllers: Principles and Applications, 5th Ed.-John W. Webb, Ronald A. Reis 
5.Programming and Customizing the AVR Microcontroller-Gadre, McGraw-Hill 
ESE 3218    
Sessional on ESE 3217 
Credit: 0.75    
Experiments based on the theory of ESE 3217. 
ESE 3221   
Credit: 3.0        
Energy Storage Systems 
Contact hour: 3/2 hrs/week 
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Introduction: Need of energy storage; Different modes of Energy Storage; Comparative Ratings and Properties: 
System Ratings, Energy density, Power density and specific power. 
Mechanical Energy Storage: Pumped hydro storage, Elastic energy storage, Energy storage in Advanced Flywheels, 
Compressed air energy storage 
Thermal Energy Storage: Sensible heat storage system, Latent heat storage system, Solar energy storage systems. 
Electrochemical Energy Storage: Structure, working principle, Classification of Batteries; Batteries with aqueous 
electrolyte: Lead-acid, Alkaline, Nickel-iron, Nickel-cadmium, Ni-MH; Batteries with nonaqueous electrolyte: 
Lithium-metal, Lithium-metal polymer, Lithium-ion, Lithium-iron phosphate, Lithium-ion polymer, Large size 
Batteries: Sodium-sulfur (NaS) Battery, Vanadium Redox flow battery; Modeling of batteries; Battery Management 
System; Aging of electrochemical batteries;  
22 | P a g e 
Electro-magnetic Energy Storage Superconducting Magnet Energy Storage (SMES) systems, Sizing of SMES; 
Capacitor and Batteries: Comparison and application; Super capacitor: Electrochemical Double Layer Capacitor 
(EDLC), principle of working, structure performance and application. 
Advanced Energy Storage Systems: Fuel cell: Principle of working, Basic thermodynamics and electrochemical 
principles, Classification, Electrolytes, Fuel types, Fuel cell electrodes; Applications for power and transportation. 
Hydrogen System: Its merit as a fuel; Production: from fossil fuels, electrolysis, thermal decomposition, 
photochemical, photocatalytic, hybrid; Storage: Metal hydrides, Metallic alloy hydrides, Sea as the source of 
Deuterium. 
System Arrangement and application: Storage as grid component, storage with PV systems, Hybrid Power plant, 
Fast charging stations, Advanced System Architecture, Uninterruptible power supply (UPS). 
Reference Books:  
1. Energy Storage: Fundamentals, materials and applications - Robert A. Huggins 
2. Energy Storage: Systems and components - Alfed Rufer 
3. Energy Storage: Technologies and application - Ahmed Faheem Zobaa 
ESE 3222    
Sessional on ESE 3221 
Credit: 0.75    
Experiments based on the theory of ESE 3221. 
ME 3250    
Industrial Attachment 
Credit: 0.0     
Contact hours: 3/2 hrs/week 
The student will participate in attachments (for one to two weeks) in relevant industries to get hands on working 
experiences. Time of the industrial attachment will be decided by the department. Student will submit a report after 
completion of their industrial attachment. 
FOURTH YEAR FIRST TERM 
ESE 4000    
Project & Thesis I 
Credit: 1.5     
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Theoretical and experimental investigation of various topics in Energy Science and Engineering. The topic should 
provide an opportunity for the student to develop initiative, creative ability and engineering judgment. Individual or 
group study (preferable not more than two in a group) will be required. Department will assign a supervisor for each 
student. At the end of the Term, the student is expected to complete the preliminary literature survey and select the 
topic for study. Each student/group has to present a seminar on the progress of their work. A brief report needs to be 
submitted during the presentation of the work. 
ESE 4105   
Fuel Combustion and IC Engines 
Credit: 3.0     
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Fuels and its Characteristics: Properties of fuels, determination, proximate and ultimate analysis; calorific value: 
HCV, LCV and their determination; conventional fuels, alternative fuels, API rating of fuels, octane number and 
cetane number. 
Combustion: Complete and incomplete combustion; combustion stoichiometry: mass basis and volume basis; 
equivalence ratio and mixture strength, lean and rich combustion; thermochemical calculations: enthalpy of 
formation, adiabatic flame temperature; types of flame: laminar and turbulent flame, premixed and diffusion flame, 
factors influencing flame velocity; combustion processes: surface or flameless combustion. 
23 | P a g e 
Introduction of IC Engine: Basic components and terminology of IC engines, classification of IC engines and their 
application; working principles of four stroke and two stroke engines - petrol/diesel engine; engine kinematics and 
performance parameters; autoignition and abnormal combustion, fundamentals of knocking/detonation in SI engines 
and CI engines, factors influencing knock/detonation, control of knock/detonation; basics of homogeneous charge 
compression ignition (HCCI) engines, direct injection spark ignition (DISI) engines.  
Engine Systems and Emission: Lubrication system in IC engine, crankcase ventilation; types of cooling systems – 
liquid and air cooling; intake and exhaust processes, mixture formation processes for SI engines, carburetor, stages of 
combustion in SI engine and CI engine; fuel injection systems in CI engine, types of nozzles, spray formation; 
Boosting of engines: supercharging and turbocharging, limitations of supercharging and turbocharging; types of 
pollution due to IC engines, sources of HC, CO and NOx, SOx emissions, emissions measurement and control. 
Reference Books: 
1. Fuels and combustion- Sharma.S.P. Cahandramohan., (1999), Tata McGraw-Hill 
2. Internal combustion engine fundamentals, 2nd Edition  by John B. Heywood 
3. Internal combustion Engines - Applied Thermosciences⸺ by Colin R. Ferguson and Allan T. Kirkpatrick 
4. Introduction to internal Combustion Engines  by Richard Stone  
ESE 4106   
Sessional on ESE 4105 
Credit: 0.75     
Sessional based on the theory of ESE 4105. 
ESE 4115   
Power Plant Engineering 
Credit: 3.0     
Contact hour: 3/2 hrs/week 
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Introduction: Features, types, components, general layouts, criteria for comparison and selection of power plant; 
Energy sources and their availability; overview of power sector in Bangladesh, present status and future trends. 
Power Plant Economics: Load curves, load factor, diversity factor, load management, number and size of generating 
unit, effect of load on power plant design, load forecasting, performance and operating characteristics of power 
plants, economic scheduling principle; cost of electrical energy, peak load pricing, tariff. 
Hydro Power Plants: Essential feature of hydroelectric power plant; present situation of hydro power generation; 
site selection, plant layout and various components, power plant safety reservoir, dams & tunnels etc.; hydrology: 
precipitation, run-off, hydrograph, flow duration curve, mass curve; pumped storage power plant; design, 
construction and operation of different components of hydro plant like dam, spillways, canals, penstocks, surge tank, 
draft tubes; types and selection of turbines, governing of turbine; construction and working principles of various types 
of valves and pumps and hydraulic system.  
Steam Power Plants: Fields of use, site selection, general layout, operation and performance, binary vapor cycle 
power plant. 
Diesel Power Plants: Fields of use, layout, working principle of diesel engine, fuel handling and storage, diesel 
engine power plant auxiliaries, starting and stopping, performance of diesel engines, heat balance. 
Gas Turbine Power Plants: Fields of use, components, layout; thermodynamic analysis of gas turbine cycles, cycle 
improvements, intercoolers, reheaters, regenerators; operation and performance of gas turbine power plants; 
combined cycle power plant with simple thermodynamic analysis. 
Power Plant Accessories: Water treatment plant, cooling tower, draught systems, chimney and foundation design.  
Reference Books: 
1. Power Plant Engineering  by Black and Veatch. CBS Pub and Distributors, New Delhi, 1998. 
24 | P a g e 
2. A Text Book of Power Plant Engineering  by R. K. Rajput. Laxmi Publications (P) Ltd, 2005. 
3.  Power Plant Engineering  by P.K. Nag. Tata Mcgraw Hill Publishing Co Ltd, New Delhi, 2nd Edition,  2001. 
4. Power Plant Engineering by  E L Wakil, McGraw-hill Book Co, N.Y., 2001. 
5. Power Generation, operation and control by A.J. Wood, B.F. Wollenberg., John Wiley, New York,1984. 
ESE 4116   
Sessional on ESE 4115 
Credit: 0.75     
Sessional based on the theory of ESE 4115. 
ESE 4125  
Contact hour: 3/2 hrs/week 
Safety and Environmental Aspects of Energy Projects 
Credit: 3.0     
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Safety Management: Basic about hazard, risk, accident, safety and safety management; sustainable development and 
triple bottom line theory; evolution of hazards, hazards classification and detail of different types of hazards; hazard 
analysis (HAZAN), hazard matrix and hazard/safety management; fault tree and event tree analysis, FMEM, hazard 
operability (HAZOP), Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP), safety audit, accident  investigation  and  reporting; 
characteristics of petroleum fuels, explosive mixture and their limits; fire, explosion and BLEVE incidences and their 
management; electrical hazard management; uses of personnel protective equipments, practice for following different 
work permits; duties and responsibilities of safety officer/engineer and safety committee; hazard or safety ratings of 
industries-Accident Frequency Rate (AFR), Accident Severity Rate (ASR) and Fatal Accident Rate (FAR). 
Occupational Health and Hazards in Petroleum and Chemical Industries: Occupational health and diseases, 
Threshold Limit Values (TLVs); toxicity and chemical hazard in process and petroleum Industries; Material Safety 
Data Sheet (MSDS) and its uses; safety signs for transportation of chemicals and petroleum products. 
Environmental Issues and Pollution control: Pollution and their types; environmental impact by thermal power 
plants and petroleum industries; remedial measures of pollution; concept of green house, SMOG, acid rain, 
sustainable development; environmental regulations, concept of Initial Environmental Examination(IEE), 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), Environmental Management plan (EMP) and ISO-14001 - 14002, 
industrial categories on the basis of Bangladesh environmental regulation (DOE). 
Reference Books: 
1. Industrial Safety and management by Engr. Mohammad HafizurRhaman 
2. Loss Prevention in the Process Industries, 3rd edition by M.S. Mannan 
3. Guidelines for Hazard Evaluation Procedures - With Worked Examples, CCPS (2nd Edition) 
4. Energy Management and Control Systems by M.C. Macedo Jr. (John Wiley and Sons) 
5.  
6.  
Environmental Impact Analysis Handbook by J.G.Rau, D.C.Wood (McGraw Hill). 
Energy & Environment by  J.M. Fowler, (McGrawHill) 
ESE 4126   
Sessional on ESE 4125 
Credit: 0.75     
Sessional based on the theory of ESE 4125. 
Contact hour: 3/2 hrs/week 
25 | P a g e 
ESE 4130   
Energy Engineering Simulation II  
Credit: 0.75     
Contact hour: 3/2 hrs/week 
Solution of Energy Science and Engineering problems using standard simulation software.  
ESE 40--    
ESE 40--    
ESE 4000    
Optional I  
Credit: 3.0     
Credit: 3.0     
Optional II 
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
FOURTH YEAR SECOND TERM 
Project & Thesis II 
Credit: 3.0     
Contact hour: 6 hrs/week 
Students will continue their research work from previous Term. Students should consult closely with their supervisor 
throughout the completion of the research work. Normally, students will submit drafts of individual chapters to the 
supervisor as they are completed. The department will declare specific deadline for thesis submission and oral 
presentation. Students will submit their thesis through their supervisor. They will also present their thesis in an oral 
examination along with a complete demonstration of the project and thesis.  
ESE 4213   
Nuclear Power Engineering 
Credit: 3.0     
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Introduction to Nuclear Physics : Principles of nuclear energy, nuclear masses and mass defect, binding energy, 
nuclear reactions, energy from fission and fusion, chain reaction, cross sections and concepts of nuclear criticality, 
radioactive decay, half-life. 
Nuclear Reactors: Progression of nuclear reactor, components of nuclear reactor; fuel, moderator, coolant, heat 
transfer techniques in nuclear reactors; classification of nuclear reactors, boiling water reactor, pressurized water 
reactor, pressurized heavy water reactor, gas cooled reactor, high temperature gas cooled reactor, pebble bed reactor, 
fast breeder reactor, liquid metal fast breeder reactor; reactor control devices, control rods and their driving 
mechanisms, control rod materials, radiation protection. 
Nuclear Power Plant Design: Layout of nuclear power plants; containment buildings, primary containment vessels; 
Structure of reactor core, mechanical stress in various structures; description and analysis of power plant systems and 
components. 
Nuclear Safety: Radiation safety and environmental aspects of nuclear power generation, safety control, pollution 
control, abatement, international convention on safety aspects; quantities and units of use in radiological protection, 
biological effect of ionizing radiation, dosimetry of ionizing radiation; International systems of radiological 
protection, radiation hazards prevention, personal monitoring, radiation shielding. 
Fuel Cycle and Waste Management: Nuclear fuels and fuel cycles, different types of nuclear fuel cycles,uranium 
mining and milling, fuel enrichment, fuel fabrication; types of nuclear wastes, waste conditioning: recycling, 
reprocessing, intermediate storage, partitioning & transmutation, final disposal. 
Reference Books:  
1. Nuclear Power Plant Engineering by J.H. Rust, 1979.  
2. Introduction to Nuclear Engineering,  4th Ed. by J.R. Lamarsh and A.J. Baratta. Prentice Hall, 2017.  
26 | P a g e 
3. Nuclear Engineering Theory and Technology of Commercial Nuclear Power. 2nd Ed. by Knief, R.A. 2008. 
American Nuclear Society. USA.  
4. Fundamentals of Nuclear Reactor Physics by Lewis, E.E. 2008. 1st Ed. Academic Press. USA.  
5. Nuclear Energy: An introduction to the concepts, systems and applications of nuclear processes by Murray, R.L. 
2009. 6th Ed. Elsevier Inc.  
ESE 4214   
Sessional on ESE 4213 
Credit: 0.75     
Sessional based on the theory of ESE 4213. 
ESE 4219   
Contact hour: 3/2 hrs/week 
Energy Audit and Management 
Credit: 3.0     
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Introduction: Concept of energy management programme; basic components of an energy audit; types of energy 
audit, industrial, commercial and residential audit planning; understanding of energy costs, bench marking, energy 
performance index, understanding of energy used pattern; system efficiencies, input energy requirements 
optimization; energy conservation act and its features; duties and responsibilities of energy managers and auditors; 
energy audit instruments/ tools.  
Material and Energy Balance: Basic principles; Sankey diagrams; material balances for different processes; energy 
balances, methods for preparing process flow chart, material and energy balance procedures.  
Energy Action Planning: Energy management systems, Management commitment and energy conservation policy, 
energy performance assessment, estimation of energy savings potential.  
Monitoring and Targeting: Elements and techniques of monitoring & targeting, data and information-analysis; 
energy consumption, production, cumulative sum of differences (CUSUM), case studies.  
Thermal Energy Management: Energy conservation in thermal energy systems; waste heat recovery; thermal 
insulation; energy conservation in buildings, green building concepts; case studies.  
Electrical Energy Management: Reactive power management; energy conservation in electrical systems, cases 
studies.  
Financial and Project Management: Analysis of payback period; NPV; IRR; sensitivity analysis; analysis of energy 
performance contracts; project definition, scope, design, financing and planning techniques; cost benefit analysis, 
case studies.  
Global Environmental Concerns: UNFCC, Protocols, COP, CDM, PCF, SDGs, delta plan.   
Reference Books:  
1. Fundamentals of Energy Management and Energy Audit, Model 1, Paper 1, Published by SREDA, 2019. 
2. General Aspects of Energy Management and Energy Audit, Publisher: Bureau of Energy Efficiency India, 2015. 
ESE 4220   
Sessional on ESE 4219 
Credit: 0.75     
Sessional based on the theory of ESE 4219. 
Contact hour: 3/2 hrs/week 
27 | P a g e 
ESE 40--    
Optional III 
Credit: 3.0     
ESE 40--    
ESE 40--    
ESE 4003   
Credit: 3.0     
Credit: 3.0     
Optional IV 
Optional V 
OPTIONAL COURSES 
Hydrogen and Fuel Cells  
Credit: 3.0     
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Hydrogen Production Technologies: Review of hydrogen energy; production of hydrogen: chemical production of 
hydrogen, steam reforming, water electrolysis, gasification and woody biomass conversion, biological hydrogen 
production, photo dissociation, direct thermal or catalytic splitting of water; purification (removal of CO and CO2), 
desulphurization;electrolytic hydrogen production, electrolyser configurations. 
Hydrogen Storage, Transportation and Application: Hydrogen storage options, compressed gas storage, liquid 
hydrogen, hydride, chemical storage, solid state storage; hydrogen transmission systems, hydrogen fueling systems 
and infrastructure.; applications of hydrogen, hydrogen as a fuel for IC engine, hydrogen policy and environmental 
impacts of hydrogen, hydrogen safety. 
Fuel Cell: Review of fuel cell; thermodynamics and kinetics of fuel cell process, heat released, reasons for losses in 
voltage, electrode kinetics, porous electrodes, characteristics, fabrication of electrodes, assembly of fuel cells, testing, 
classification of fuel cells based on nature of electrolyte, operating temperature; performance evaluation of fuel cell,  
comparison on battery Vs fuel cell. 
Characteristics and Status of Various Types of Fuel Cells: Alkaline Fuel Cells (AFC), Phosphoric Acid Fuel Cells 
(PAFC), Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cells (PEMFC), Direct Methanol Fuel Cells (DMFC), Molten 
Carbonate Fuel Cells (MCFC), Solid Oxide Fuel Cells (SOFC), Regenerative Fuel Cells (RFC), use of alternative 
fuel in fuel cells, specific characteristics, advantages and applications. 
Fuel Cell Power Plants and Applications: Fuel cell plants and sub systems, efficiency of systems, performance; 
emissions, heat balance, environmental benefits; heat rate of various fuel cell plants, natural gas and coal-based fuel 
cell power plant concepts, cogeneration and CHP, fuel cell hybrids, fuel cell systems for portable, automotive, 
stationary applications, future challenges. 
Reference Books: 
1. Hydrogen and Fuel Cells: A Comprehensive Guide by Rebecca L. and Busby, 2005, Penn Well Corporation, 
Oklahoma. 
2. Hydrogen and Fuel Cells: Emerging Technologies and Applications by Bent Sorensen, 2011, Academic Press, 
2nd ed. 
3. Fuel Cells Principles and Applications by B.Viswanathan and Aulice Scibioh, 2006, Universities Press, 
Hyderabad. 
4. Fuel Cell Systems Explained by  J. Larminie & A. Dicks, 2003, Wiley 
5. Fuel Cells: From Fundamentals and Applications by  S. Srinivasan, 2006, Springer. 
28 | P a g e 
ESE 4005   
Hybrid and Electric Vehicles  
Credit: 3.0     
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Introduction: History of hybrid and electric vehicles (HEVs), reasons for HEV development, types; HEV 
configurations, social and environmental importance of hybrid and electric vehicles, advantages; challenges and key 
technology of HEVs – concept of hybridization of the Automobile-Plug-in HEVs, commercially available HEVs. 
Hybrid Electric Drive-trains: Basic concept of hybrid traction, various hybrid and electric drive-train topologies: 
series hybrid electric drive trains, parallel hybrid electric drive trains; traction motor characteristics, transmission 
configuration, components: gears, differential, clutch, brakes; power flow control, energy consumption concept of 
hybrid electric drive trains, fuel efficiency analysis, impact of modern drive-trains on energy supplies. 
Electric Propulsion Unit: Introduction to electric components used in hybrid and electric vehicles, configuration and 
control of DC Motor drives, configuration and control of Induction Motor drives, configuration and control of 
Permanent Magnet Motor drives, configuration and control of Switch Reluctance Motor drives, drive system 
efficiency. 
Power Electronics and Power Flow: Rectifiers, Buck convertor, Boost converter, Voltage source inverter, Current 
source inverter, DC-AC convertor; Power flow: mechanical power generation, storage and transmission to wheels; 
electric power generation, storage and conversion to mechanical power; hydraulic power generation, storage and 
conversion to mechanical power. 
Energy Storage: Energy storage requirements in HEVs, battery storage, fuel cell storage, super capacitor storage, 
flywheel storage, hybridization of different energy storage devices. 
Sizing the Drive System: Matching the electric machine and the internal combustion engine (ICE), sizing the 
propulsion motor, sizing the power electronics, selecting the energy storage technology. 
Energy Management Strategies: Energy management strategies used in hybrid and electric vehicles, classification 
of different energy management strategies, comparison of different energy management strategies, implementation 
issues of energy management strategies. 
References Books: 
1. Iqbal Hussein, Electric and Hybrid Vehicles: Design Fundamentals, Second Edition, CRC Press, 2011. 
2. Modern Electric, Hybrid Electric and Fuel Cell Vehicles: Fundamentals, Theory and Design by MehrdadEhsani, 
YimiGao, Sebastian E. Gay, Ali Emadi, 2010, CRC Press. 
3. Electric Vehicle Technology Explained by  James Larminie, John Lowry, 2003, Wiley. 
4. Hybrid electric Vehicles Principles and applications With practical perspectives by Chris Mi, Dearborn, M. Abul 
Masrur, David Wenzhong Gao, 2011, Wiley. 
ESE 4007   
Smart Grid Technology  
Credit: 3.0     
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Introduction: Definition, applications, overview of the technologies required for the Smart Grid, micro grid and 
smart grid comparison; sustainable energy options for the smart grid, economics and market operations of smart grid. 
Smart Grid Communications and Measurement Technology: Two-way digital communications paradigm, 
communications infrastructure, network architectures; IP-based systems, monitoring; PMU, smart meters, 
measurement technologies; sensor networks, fault detection and self-healing systems, GIS and GPS tools, multi-agent 
systems (MAS) technology. 
Performance Analysis Tools for Smart Grid Design: Introduction and challenges to load flow in smart grid, 
weaknesses of the present load flow methods; load flow state of the art: classical, extended formulations and 
algorithms; congestion management effect, load flow for smart grid design, DSOPF application to the smart grid, 
Static Security Assessment (SSA) and contingencies; contingencies, contingency studies. 
29 | P a g e 
Stability Analysis Tools for Smart Grid: Introduction to stability, strengths and weaknesses of existing voltage 
stability analysis tools, voltage stability assessment, voltage stability assessment techniques. 
Computational Tools for Smart Grid Design: Introduction to computational tools, decision support tools, 
optimization techniques, classical optimization method, heuristic optimization, evolutionary computational 
techniques, adaptive dynamic programming techniques, Pareto methods, hybridizing optimization techniques, 
computational challenges. 
Interoperability, Standards, and Cyber Security: Introduction, interoperability, cyber security challenges; load 
altering attacks, false data injection attacks, defense mechanisms, privacy challenges, research areas for smart grid 
development. 
Reference book: 
1. Smart Grid: Technology and Applications  by Janaka B. Ekanayake, Nick Jenkins KithsiriLiyanage 
2. Smart Grid Technology (A Cloud Computing and Data Management Approac) by SudipMisra, SamareshBera. 
3. Smart Grid Systems: Modeling and Control by N. Ramesh Babu. 
4. Communication and Networking in Smart Grids by Yang Xiao. 
ESE 4011  
Materials for Energy Engineering Applications 
Credit: 3.0     
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Materials for Solar Cell:  Inorganic materials for solar cell:  Si , GaAs and other III-V compounds, PERL Si solar 
cell materials; crystalline, multicrystalline, amorphous, and microcrystalline solar cells. 
Organic/flexible solar cells-various types, organic tandem; Dye-sensitized cells, polymer composites for solar cells; 
modern high efficiency solar cell materials, Perovskite solar cell (PSC) materials. 
Materials for Fuel Cell: Review of fuel cell, anode-cathode materials, proton conducting ceramic fuel cell, PEM fuel 
cell, Acid/alkaline fuel cells. 
Electrolyte Materials for Energy Application: Organic and inorganic electrolyte, polymers electrolytes, ionic 
liquid based polymer electrolyte, solid oxide electrolytic materials, polymer membranes materials,  
Advanced Materials for Energy Storage: Capacitor, ultra‐capacitor; application of Graphene, Carbon Nano‐Tubes 
(CNT), fabrication of CNTs, CNTs for hydrogen storage, CNT‐polymer composites, MOF materials for Hydrogen 
fuel storage.  
Fabrication Technologies and Processes: Sputtering, physical vapor deposition, chemical vapor deposition (CVD); 
diffusion, oxidation, photolithography. 
Materials Characterization: X‐ray diffraction (XRD), Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), Raman spectroscopy, 
Atomic force microscopy (AFM), Transmission electron microscopy (TEM). 
References Books 
1.Advanced Semiconductor Fundamentals by Robert F. P., 2002, 2nd Edition, Pearson 
2.Energy Materials by Duncan W. B., Dermot O., and Richard I. W., 2011, 1st Edition, Wiley 
3.Fundamentals of Solar Cells: PV Solar Energy Conversion by Fahrenbruch A. L. and Bube R. H., 1983, Academic 
Press  
4.Solar Cells: Materials, Manufacture and Operation Tom M. and Luis C., 2005, 1st Edition, Elsevier Science 
5.Organic Photovoltaics: Materials, Device Physics, and Manufacturing Technologies by  Christoph B. Ullrich S. 
and Vladimir D., 2014, 2nd Edition, Wiley‐VCH  
6.Nanostructured and Advanced Materials for Fuel Cells by  San P. J. and Pei K. S., 2013, 1st Edition, CRC Press 
7.Handbook of Battery Materials by  Daniel C. and Besenhard J. O., 2011, 1st Edition Wiley‐VCH 
30 | P a g e 
ESE 4013   
Energy in Built Environment 
Credit: 3.0     
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Introduction: Indoor activities and environmental control, internal and external factors on energy use, characteristics 
of energy use and its management, macro aspect of energy use in dwellings; Thermal comfort, ventilation and air 
quality, air-conditioning requirement, visual perception, illumination requirement, auditory requirement. 
Influence of Climate and Solar Radiation: The sun-earth relationship, climate, wind, solar radiation and 
temperature; sun shading and solar radiation on surfaces, energy impact on the shape and orientation of buildings; 
lighting: characteristics and estimation, methods of day-lighting, architectural considerations for day-lighting. 
Thermal Performance of Buildings: Steady and unsteady heat transfer through wall and glazed window, standards 
for thermal performance of building envelope; evaluation of the overall thermal transfer: thermal gain and net heat 
gain, enduse energy requirements; status of energy use in buildings, estimation of energy use in a building. 
Energy and Environment Management in Building: Energy audit and energy targeting; technological options for 
energy management; Natural and forced ventilation–indoor environment and air quality; airflow and air pressure on 
buildings, flow due to stack effect. 
Technologies for Low Energy Buildings: Passive building architecture: radiative cooling, solar cooling techniques, 
solar desiccant dehumidification for ventilation; natural and active cooling with adaptive comfort, evaporative 
cooling; zero energy building concept. 
Reference book: 
1. Heating and Cooling of Buildings: Design for Efficiency by  J. Krieder and A. Rabl (2000), McGraw-Hill. 
2. Mechanical and Electrical Equipment for Buildings by  S. M. Guinnes and Reynolds (1989), Wiley. 
3. Energy Design for Architects by  A Shaw (1991),  AEE Energy Books. 
ESE 4015   
Energy System Design and Optimization 
Credit: 3.0     
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Introduction: Overview of various technologies and conventional methods of energy conversion, power cycles, 
designing a workable system, workable and optimum systems, steps in arriving at a workable system, creativity in 
concept selection, equation fitting, mathematical modeling, polynomial representation, functions of two variables, 
exponential forms, best fit method of least squares. 
Modeling and System Simulation: Modeling of thermal equipment, counter flow heat exchanger, evaporators and 
condensers, heat exchanger effectiveness, effectiveness of a counter flow heat exchanger – NTU, pressure drop and 
pumping power; system simulation, classes of simulation, information flow diagrams, sequential and simultaneous 
calculations, successive substitution. 
Optimizing: Optimization, mathematical representation of optimization problems, optimization procedure, setting up 
the mathematical statement of the optimization problem, Lagrange multipliers, Lagrange multiplier equations; 
unconstrained optimization, constrained optimization; sensitivity coefficients, search methods, single variable, 
Exhaustive-Dichotomous and Fibonacci, multivariable unconstrained, lattice-univariable and steepest ascent. 
Dynamic, Linear and Geometric Programming: Dynamic programming, characteristic of the dynamic 
programming solution, apparently constrained problem, application of dynamic programming to energy system 
problems, geometric programming, one independent variable unconstrained, multivariable optimization, constrained 
optimization with zero degree of difficulty, linear programming, simplex method, Big-M method, application of LP to 
thermal systems. 
Reference book: 
1. Systems Modeling and Analysis by  I.J. Nagrath and M. Gopal (1984), Tata McGraw-Hill. 
31 | P a g e 
2. Design of Thermal Systems by  W.F. Stoecker (1989), 3rd Edition, McGraw-Hill. 
3. Analysis and Design of Thermal Systems by  B.K. Hodge and Robert P. Taylor (1990), Prentice-Hall Inc. 
4. Globally Optimal Design by D.J. Wide (1984), Wiley Interscience 
ESE 4017   
Energy Efficiency Assessment  
Credit: 3.0     
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Assessment for Thermal System: Boiler and steam system: Thermal efficiency and its determination by direct and 
indirect method, blow-down, boiler water treatment, external water treatment, feed water preheating, combustion air 
preheating, excess air control, energy saving opportunities in boiler, waste heat recovery; steam distribution system, 
steam traps and energy conservation opportunities.  
Assessment for Mechanical System: Fans and blowers: Difference between fans, blowers and compressors, types of 
fan: centrifugal, arial flow, fan laws, fan design and selection criteria’s, flow control strategies, fan performance, 
assessment, energy saving opportunities in fans. 
Pumps and Pumping System: Types of pumps, pump curves, factors affecting pump performance, coupling, flow 
control strategies, energy conservation opportunities in pumping system. 
Refrigeration System: Performance assessment of a refrigeration system, COP, factor affecting performance, energy 
savings opportunities in refrigeration systems; cooling towers, flow control strategies, energy saving options in 
cooling towers. 
Assessment for Electrical system: Motors: Energy efficient motors, factors affecting efficiency, loss distribution, 
constructional details, characteristics – variable speed, variable duty cycle systems, RMS hp- voltage variation
voltage unbalance- over motoring- motor energy audit. 
Diesel Generator System: Fundamentals; types, capacity selection; performance assessment; energy conservation 
opportunities.  
Reference Books:  
1. Energy Efficiency in Thermal Systems, Model 2, Published by SREDA, 2019. 
2. Energy Efficiency in Electrical Systems, Model 3, Published by SREDA, 2019. 
3. Energy performance assessment for Equipment and Utility Systems, Model 4, Published by SREDA, 2019 
ESE 4025   
HVAC&R System Design  
Credit: 3.0     
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Introduction and Types of Cooling Systems: Review of basic concepts and definitions of refrigeration system, 
refrigeration cycles, properties and classifications of commonly used refrigerants, vapor compression cycle, analysis 
of Vapor compression refrigeration cycle, multi pressure systems of refrigeration, working principle of thermally 
driven cooling machines, vapor absorption refrigeration, single, double and triple effect absorption chiller, adsorption 
chiller; air cycle refrigeration; desiccant evaporative cooling; ejector cycle. 
Air-conditioning: Indoor and outdoor air conditions, comfort air conditions and comfort zone indoor air quality, 
review of psychrometry; Central air conditioning system: essential components of central air conditioning plant: 
water chiller and water heater, air handling unit, fan control unit, chilled water and hot water recirculating system, 
return air supply system, fresh air supply system and air mixture chamber; supply fan, air dust cleaning and bacteria 
removal, air supply and air return terminals, diffusers, dampers, grillers and registers; introduction to variable 
refrigerant flow (VRF) technology.  
Air-conditioning System Design: CFM rating and tons of air conditioning of central air conditioning plant, cooling 
and heating loads; calculation procedures, duct sizing and piping design; pumps and fans selection, air ventilation; 
calculation of fresh air supply of multi-story buildings, air handling units for treatment of fresh and return, forced 
convection based air ventilator design. 
32 | P a g e 
Cooling Towers: Types of cooling towers, performance of cooling tower, hydronic terminal units.  
Alternative Cooling Techniques: Thermo-electric, magnetocaloric, electrocaloric; thermo-accoustics, solar-assisted 
cooling systems. 
Reference books:  
1. Refrigeration and Air Conditioning by  Arora, C. P., (2007),, Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Company Ltd. 
2. Refrigeration and Air conditioning by  WF Stocker and J W Jones, (1999), McGraw Hill Book Company. 
3. ASHRAE, Handbook - Fundamentals, SI Edition by Circle, T. and N.E. Atlanta. (1997), American Society of 
Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers. USA.  
4.  Refrigeration and Air conditioning by Manohar Prasad, (1998), Wiley Eastern Ltd. 
5. Refrigeration and Air-Conditioning by  S. C. Arora and Dumkundwar, (1996), Dhanpathrai Publishers. 
ESE 4031   
Power Plant Instrumentation and Control 
Credit: 3.0     
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Instrumentation: Review of flow, level, pressure, temperature measurement and instrument, control valves; general 
concepts and objectives, instrumentation of complex systems, different types of power plants and role of 
instrumentation in controlling and monitoring the power production, optimization and adaptation, thermal power 
plant instrumentation, controlling and monitoring of boilers, turbines and generators, transformers, condensers and 
power plant auxiliaries.  
Introduction to Power Plant Control: Overview of power plant control loops, complex control schemes, PID 
controller, multivariable control; fundamental concept on integrated control system for power plant application, 
identification of analog and binary drives of power plant. 
Various Types of Control Technics: Furnace draft and temperature control, combustion control, drum and feed 
water level control, boiler water level and pressure control, emergencies and actions, alarm and annunciation, safety, 
interlock and supervisory schemes, salient features of instrumentation of hydro-electric, nuclear and nonconventional 
power plants, monitoring generation and load flow, plant efficiency, excitation control and temperature profile, DCS, 
fire detection and protection system, plant communication system; study of P&I diagram and presentation of 
instrumentation on P&ID. 
Control of Renewable Energy Systems: Fundamental control of photovoltaic, wind, battery and fuel cell systems.  
Reference Books: 
1. Power Plant Instrumentation and Control Handbook: A Guide to Thermal Power Plants by  Swapan Basu, 
Ajay Debnath. Machine Learning, by Tom Mitchell, 2014. 
2. Thermal Power Plant Control and Instrumentation: The control of boilers and HRSGs by David Lindsley, 
John Grist, Don Parker, The Institution of Engineering and Technology: 2018 
3. Power Electronics for Renewable and Distributed Energy Systems by  Sudipta Chakraborty, Marcelo G. 
Simões, William E. Kramer; Springer 
4. Modeling, Identification and Control Methods in Renewable Energy Systems by  Nabil Derbel • Quanmin 
Zhu; Springer 
ESE 4075  
Energy Project Development and Evaluation 
Credit: 3.0     
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Energy Project Preparation and Development: Features of energy projects, project cycle, context of energy 
projects, project identification, project proposal preparation, pre-feasibility and feasibility studies, budgeting, project 
approval and implementation.  
33 | P a g e 
Cost Concepts and Financial Calculations: Cost concepts, time value of money, interest formulas and equivalence, 
inflation, methods of project evaluation, deprecation.  
Economic Evaluation of Energy Projects: Alternatives methods of project evaluation, Traditional methods and new 
developments, valuation of costs and benefits, Uncertainty and risk analysis of projects, Sensitivity and break even 
analysis. 
Financial Evaluation of Projects: Sources of funds, project financing, elements of financial costs, financial structure 
and project feasibility, revenue streams, effects of assumptions and pricing, sensitivity analysis.  
Environmental Issues in Energy Projects: Evaluation of environmental impacts, methods of economic evaluation 
of environmental impacts, energy sector and environmental policies, case studies. 
Reference books 
1. Financing Energy Projects in Emerging Economies by  H. Razavi (1996),, PennWell Books, Tulsa, Oklahoma. 
2. Project Evaluation: Techniques and Practices for Developing Countries by H.K. Sang (1995),  Avebury, 
England. Reference Books 
3. Contemporary Engineering Economics, Third Edition by  C.S. Park (2002), Prentice-Hall, NJ.  
4. Benefit-Cost Analysis: In Theory and Practice by  R. Zebre and D. Dively (1994), Harper Collins. 
ESE 4077  
Energy Modeling and Project Management 
Credit: 3.0     
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Introduction: Basic concept of econometrics and statistical analysis; The 2-variable regression model; The multiple 
regression model; Tests of regression coefficients and regression equation; Econometric techniques used for energy 
analysis and forecasting with case studies; Operation of computer package.  
Input-Output Analysis: Basic concept of Input-output analysis; concept of energy multiplier and implication of 
energy multiplier for analysis of regional and national energy policy; Energy and environmental Input - Output 
analyses using I-O model. 
Energy Modeling: Interdependence of energy-economy-environment; Modeling concept, and application, 
Methodology of energy demand analysis; Methodology for energy forecasting; Sectoral energy demand forecasting; 
Interfuel substitution models; SIMA model, and I-O model for energy policy analysis; Simulation and forecasting of 
future energy demand; Energy Economics and Policies: National and Sectoral energy planning; Integrated resource 
planning; Energy pricing. 
Project Evaluation & Management: Financial analysis: Project cash flows, time value of money, life cycle 
approach and analysis, conception, definition, planning, feasibility and analysis; Project appraisal criteria; Risk 
analysis; Project planning matrix; Aims oriented project planning; Social cost benefit analysis. Network analysis for 
project management; Time estimation; Critical path determination; PERT, CPM and CERT; Fuzzy logic analysis; 
Stochastic based formulations; Project evaluation techniques; Funds planning; Project material management, 
evaluation and analysis; Implementation and monitoring; Performance indices; Case studies. 
Reference books 
1. Energy Policy Analysis and Modeling, M. Munasinghe and P. Meier Cambridge University Press, 1993.  
2. The Economics of Energy Demand: A Survey of Applications, W.A Donnelly New York, 1987.  
3. Econometrics Models and Economic Forecasts, S. Pindyck and Daniel L Rubinfeld, 3rd edition McGraw Hill, 
New York 1991.  
4. Sectoral Energy Demand Studies: Application of the END-USE Approach to Asian Countries, UN-ESCAP, 
New York 1991. 
5. Guide Book on Energy – Environment Planning in Developing Countries – Methodological Guide on 
Economic Sustainability and Environmental Betterment Through Energy Savings and Fuel Switching in 
Developing Countries, UN-ESCAP, New York 1996.  
6. Forecasting Methods and Applications, S.Makridakis, Wiley 1983 
34 | P a g e 
ESE 4085   
Mineral Energy Resources  
Credit: 3.0     
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Introduction: An overview of hydrocarbon reserves in Bangladesh; Historical over view of discovery and 
exploitation of petroleum and its products; Petroleum formation; Physical and chemical properties of petroleum; 
Introduction to petroleum and mining geology and its classification; Petroleum system; Source of petroleum; 
Mineralogy and Petrology: Origin of minerals and definition of rocks and minerals; Physical and chemical 
properties of rocks and minerals; classification of rocks; Mode of occurrence, Distribution, Genesis, Evaluation and 
exploration for metallic and industrial mineral deposits; Geological resources (hydrocarbon and mineral resources) 
and their geological environment. 
Environmental Geology: Petroleum industry, petroleum exploration, drilling, production, reservoir performance, oil 
and gas transportation, utilization of oil and natural gas.  Introduction to mining industry; economics and structure of 
the mining industry; terminology of mining engineering; explorations; mining operations; mineral processing; 
mineral purchasing; metallurgy; roles and responsibility of energy engineers to mining industry; problems and 
environmental impacts in mining industry. 
Exploration Methods: Subsurface geological cross sections and maps; Seismology and seismic survey; Gravity and 
magnetic surveying; and petroleum deposits. Methods of coal, NG, Crude oil exploration; Open and pit mining. 
Reference Books: 
1.      
2.      
3.      
4.      
5.      
Petroleum formation and occurrence by B.P. Tissot, D.H.Welte, 2nd  edition, Springer. 
Elements of mining by  Lewis, R.S., and Clark G.B. 
Energy resources of Bangladesh by  Imam, B., 2012, UGC Pub., Dhaka, Bangladesh.2nd  edition. 
Introduction to Petroleum Exploration and Engineering by  Andrew Plamer, 2016. 
Introduction to Mineralogy and Petrology by  S. K. Haldar & Josip Tišljar, 2014. 1st Edition, Elsevier. 
ESE 4093   
Credit: 3.0      
Atmosphere, Ocean and Climate Dynamics 
Contact hour: 3 hrs/week 
Atmosphere: Earth System: Components of the Earth System; Hydrological Cycle; Carbon Cycle; Characteristics of 
the atmosphere: chemical composition, physical properties of air; Global energy balance: Atmospheric absorption 
spectrum, greenhouse effect; Vertical structure of atmosphere; convection in the atmosphere; meridional structure of 
atmosphere. 
Ocean: Ocean and its circulation: Physical characteristics, observed mean circulation, inferences from geostrophic 
and hydrostatic balance, ocean eddies; Wind-driven circulation: wind stress and Ekman layer, baroclinic instability; 
thermohaline circulation. 
Climate Dynamics: Equitorial current system; Regional circulation system: Jet stream; Subtropical High; Equitorial 
Trough; Monsoons; Interannual variability of the atmospheric Ocean System: El Nino and the southern oscillation; 
Time scales of climate variability. 
Reference Books: 
1. Atmosphere, Ocean and Climate Dynamics by John Marshall and R. Alan Plumb 
2. Climate Dynamics of the Tropics by Stefan Hastenarth, Springer Science Publication 
Atmospheric Science -An Introductory Survey by John M.Wallace • Peter V.Hobbs 
35 | P a g e